BASIC - Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction
Code
Origin
The original BASIC language was released on May 1, 1964 by John G. Kemeny and
Thomas E. Kurtz and implemented under their direction by a team of Dartmouth
College students.
The acronym BASIC comes from the name of
BASIC was designed to allow students to
the Dartmouth Time-Sharing System. It
technical

an unpublished paper by Thomas Kurtz.
write mainframe computer programs for
was intended specifically for less
users.

The language was based on FORTRAN II, with some influences from ALGOL 60 and
with additions to make it suitable for timesharing. Initially, BASIC
concentrated on supporting straightforward mathematical work with character
string functionality being added by 1965. Wanting use of the language to become
widespread, its designers made the compiler available free of charge. In the
following years, as other dialects of BASIC appeared, Kemeny and Kurtz's
original BASIC dialect became known as Dartmouth BASIC.
Spread on minicomputers
Knowledge of the relatively simple BASIC became widespread for a computer
language, and it was implemented by a number of manufacturers, becoming fairly
popular on newer minicomputers* such as the DEC PDP series. A version was a core
part of the Pick operating system from 1973 onward, where a compiler renders it
into bytecode, able to be interpreted by a virtual machine.
During this period a number of simple computer games were written in BASIC, most
notably Mike Mayfield's Star Trek. A number of these were collected by DEC
employee David H. Ahl and published in a newsletter he compiled. He later
collected a number of these into book form, 101 BASIC Computer Games, published
in 1973 During the same period, Ahl was involved in the creation of a small
computer for education use, an early personal computer. When management refused
to support the concept, Ahl left DEC in 1974 to found the seminal computer
magazine, Creative Computing. The book remained popular, and was re-published on
several occasions.
MSX BASIC version 3.0
The introduction of the first microcomputers in the mid-1970s was the start of
explosive growth for BASIC. It had the advantage that it was fairly well known
to the young designers and computer hobbyists who took an interest in
microcomputers. Despite Dijkstra's famous judgement in 1975, "It is practically
impossible to teach good programming to students that have had a prior exposure
to BASIC: as potential programmers they are mentally mutilated beyond hope of
regeneration", BASIC was one of the few languages that was both high-level
enough to be usable by those without training and small enough to fit into the
microcomputers of the day, making it the de facto standard programming language
on early microcomputers.
One of the first BASICs to appear was Tiny BASIC, a simple BASIC variant
designed by Dennis Allison at the urging of Bob Albrecht of the Homebrew
Computer Club. How to design and implement a stripped-down version of an
interpreter for the BASIC language was covered in articles by Allison in the
first three quarterly issues of the People's Computer Company newsletter
published in 1975 and implementations with source code published in Dr. Dobb's
Journal of Tiny BASIC Calisthenics & Orthodontia: Running Light Without
Overbyte.
Almost universally, home computers of the 1980s had a ROM-resident BASIC
interpreter, which the machines booted directly into. When the Apple II, PET
2001, and TRS-80 were all released in 1977, all three had BASIC as their primary

programming language and operating environment. Upon boot, a BASIC interpreter
in immediate mode was presented, not the command-line interface used on systems
running CP/M or MS-DOS. Commodore Business Machines included a version of
Microsoft BASIC. The Apple II and TRS-80 each had two versions of BASIC, a
smaller introductory version introduced with the initial releases of the
machines and a more advanced version developed as interest in the platforms
increased. As new companies entered the field, additional versions were added
that subtly changed the BASIC family.
As the popularity of BASIC grew in this period, computer magazines published
complete source code in BASIC for video games, utilities, and other programs.
Given BASIC's straightforward nature, it was a simple matter to type in the code
from the magazine and execute the program. Different magazines were published
featuring programs for specific computers, though some BASIC programs were
considered universal and could be used in machines running any variant of BASIC
(sometimes with minor adaptations). Many books of type-in programs were also
available, and in particular, Ahl published versions of the original 101 BASIC
games converted into the Microsoft dialect. The book reached the stores in 1978
and it became the first million-selling computer book. Later packages would also
have gaming as an introductory focus. On the business-focused CP/M computers
which soon became widespread in small business environments, Microsoft BASIC
(MBASIC) was one of the leading applications.
Visual Basic
In 1991 Microsoft introduced Visual Basic, an evolutionary development of
QuickBasic. It included constructs from that language such as block-structured
control statements, parameterized subroutines, and optional static typing, as
well as object-oriented constructs from other languages. An important driver for
the development of Visual Basic was as the new macro language for Microsoft
Excel, a spreadsheet program. To the surprise of many at Microsoft who still
initially marketed it as a language for hobbyists, the language came into
widespread use for small custom business applications. While many advanced
programmers still scoffed at its use, VB met the needs of small businesses
efficiently wherever ease of development was more of a concern than processing
speed.
By that time, computers running Windows 3.1 had become fast enough that many
business-related processes could be completed "in the blink of an eye" even
using a "slow" language, as long as large amounts of data were not involved.
Eventually, during the lengthy lifetime of VB3, knowledge of Visual Basic had
become a marketable job skill. Microsoft also produced VBScript in 1996 and
Visual Basic .NET in 2001. The latter has essentially the same power as C# and
Java but with syntax that reflects the original Basic language.
Three modern Basic variants: Mono Basic, OpenOffice.org Basic and Gambas
Post-1990 versions and dialects
Many other BASIC dialects have also sprung up since 1990. Modern commercial
incarnations include PureBasic, PowerBASIC, Xojo, Monkey X and True BASIC (the
direct successor to Dartmouth BASIC from a company controlled by Kurtz). Several
web-based simple BASIC interpreters also now exist. Versions of BASIC have been
showing up for use on smartphones and tablets. Applications for some mobile
computers with proprietary OS (CipherLab) can be built with programming
environment based on BASIC.

